---
layout: page
title: Clinical Informatics
permalink: /Clinical_Informatics/
---

# CLINICAL INFORMATICS

1. Rajkomar A, Oren E, Chen K, Dai AM, Hajaj N, Hardt M, Liu PJ, Liu X, Marcus J,
Sun M, Sundberg P, Yee H, Zhang K, Zhang Y, Flores G, Duggan GE, Irvine J, Le Q, 
Litsch K, Mossin A, Tansuwan J, Wang, Wexler J, Wilson J, Ludwig D, Volchenboum
SL, Chou K, Pearson M, Madabushi S, Shah NH, Butte AJ, Howell MD, Cui C, Corrado 
GS, Dean J. Scalable and accurate deep learning with electronic health records.
NPJ Digit Med. 2018 May 8;1:18.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31304302](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31304302)

   >Predictive modeling with electronic health record (EHR) data is anticipated to drive personalized medicine and improve healthcare quality. Constructing predictive statistical models typically requires extraction of curated predictor variables from normalized EHR data, a labor-intensive process that discards the vast majority of information in each patient's record. We propose a representation of patients' entire raw EHR records based on the Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) format. We demonstrate that deep learning methods using this representation are capable of accurately predicting multiple medical events from multiple centers without site-specific data harmonization. We validated our approach using de-identified EHR data from two US academic medical centers with 216,221 adult patients hospitalized for at least 24 h. In the sequential format we propose, this volume of EHR data unrolled into a total of 46,864,534,945 data points, including clinical notes. Deep learning models achieved high accuracy for tasks such as predicting: in-hospital mortality (area under the receiver operator curve [AUROC] across sites 0.93-0.94), 30-day unplanned readmission (AUROC 0.75-0.76), prolonged length of stay (AUROC 0.85-0.86), and all of a patient's final discharge diagnoses (frequency-weighted AUROC 0.90). These models outperformed traditional, clinically-used predictive models in all cases. We believe that this approach can be used to create accurate and scalable predictions for a variety of clinical scenarios. In a case study of a particular prediction, we demonstrate that neural networks can be used to identify relevant information from the patient's chart.

1. John W. Park, M.D., Minetta C. Liu, M.D., Douglas Yee, M.D., Christina Yau, Ph.D., Laura J. van ’t Veer, Ph.D., W. Fraser Symmans, M.D., Melissa Paoloni, D.V.M., Jane Perlmutter, Ph.D., Nola M. Hylton, Ph.D., Michael Hogarth, M.D., Angela DeMichele, M.D., Meredith B. Buxton, Ph.D., et al., for the I-SPY 2 Investigators. Adaptive Randomization of Neratinib in Early Breast Cancer. July 7, 2016 N Engl J Med 2016; 375:11-22. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1513750. https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1513750.

   >The heterogeneity of breast cancer makes identifying effective therapies challenging. The I-SPY 2 trial, a multicenter, adaptive phase 2 trial of neoadjuvant therapy for high-risk clinical stage II or III breast cancer, evaluated multiple new agents added to standard chemotherapy to assess the effects on rates of pathological complete response (i.e., absence of residual cancer in the breast or lymph nodes at the time of surgery). We used adaptive randomization to compare standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus the tyrosine kinase inhibitor neratinib with control. Neratinib reached the prespecified efficacy threshold with regard to the HER2-positive, hormone-receptor–negative signature. Neratinib added to standard therapy was highly likely to result in higher rates of pathological complete response than standard chemotherapy with trastuzumab among patients with HER2-positive, hormone-receptor–negative breast cancer. 
 
1. Xu H, Aldrich MC, Chen Q, Liu H, Peterson NB, Dai Q, Levy M, Shah A, Han X, Ruan X, Jiang M. Validating drug repurposing signals using electronic health records: a case study of metformin associated with reduced cancer mortality. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2014 Jul 22;22(1):179-91.

   >Drug repurposing, which finds new indications for existing drugs, has received great attention recently. The goal of our work is to assess the feasibility of using electronic health records (EHRs) and automated informatics methods to efficiently validate a recent drug repurposing association of metformin with reduced cancer mortality. By linking two large EHRs from Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Mayo Clinic to their tumor registries, we constructed a cohort including 32,415 adults with a cancer diagnosis at Vanderbilt and 79,258 cancer patients at Mayo from 1995 to 2010. Using automated informatics methods, we further identified type 2 diabetes patients within the cancer cohort and determined their drug exposure information, as well as other covariates such as smoking status. We then estimated HRs for all-cause mortality and their associated 95% CIs using stratified Cox proportional hazard models. HRs were estimated according to metformin exposure, adjusted for age at diagnosis, sex, race, body mass index, tobacco use, insulin use, cancer type, and non-cancer Charlson comorbidity index.   

1. Ashley EA, Butte AJ, Wheeler MT, ..., Altman RB.  Clinical evaluation incorporating a personal genome.  Lancet.  2010 Sep 12; 375(9725):1525-1535.  

   >An individual with a family history of vascular disease and early sudden death was evaluated. Clinical assessment included risk prediction for coronary artery disease, screening for causes of sudden cardiac death, and genetic counselling. Genetic analysis included the development of novel methods for the integration of whole genome sequence data including 2.6 million single nucleotide polymorphisms and 752 copy number variations. The algorithm focused on predicting genetic risk of genes associated with known Mendelian disease, recognised drug responses, and pathogenicity for novel variants. In addition, since integration of risk ratios derived from case control studies is challenging, we estimated posterior probabilities from age and sex appropriate prior probability and likelihood ratios derived for each genotype. In addition, we developed a visualisation approach to account for gene-environment interactions and conditionally dependent risks.

1. Poplin, Ryan, et al. Prediction of cardiovascular risk factors from retinal fundus photographs via deep learning. Nature Biomedical Engineering 2.3 (2018): 158. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31015713

   >Using deep-learning models trained on data from 284,335 patients and validated on two independent datasets of 12,026 and 999 patients, we predicted cardiovascular risk factors not previously thought to be present or quantifiable in retinal images, such as age (mean absolute error within 3.26 years), gender (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) = 0.97), smoking status (AUC = 0.71), systolic blood pressure (mean absolute error within 11.23 mmHg) and major adverse cardiac events (AUC = 0.70). We also show that the trained deep-learning models used anatomical features, such as the optic disc or blood vessels, to generate each prediction.

1. Tatonetti, Nicholas P., et al. Data-driven prediction of drug effects and interactions. Science Translational Medicine 4.125 (2012): 125ra31-125ra31. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3382018/

   >Adverse drug events remain a leading cause of morbidity and mortality around the world. Many adverse events are not detected during clinical trials before a drug receives approval for use in the clinic. Fortunately, as part of postmarketing surveillance, regulatory agencies and other institutions maintain large collections of adverse event reports, and these databases present an opportunity to study drug effects from patient population data. However, confounding factors such as concomitant medications, patient demographics, patient medical histories, and reasons for prescribing a drug often are uncharacterized in spontaneous reporting systems, and these omissions can limit the use of quantitative signal detection methods used in the analysis of such data. Here, we present an adaptive data-driven approach for correcting these factors in cases for which the covariates are unknown or unmeasured and combine this approach with existing methods to improve analyses of drug effects using three test data sets. We also present a comprehensive database of drug effects (Offsides) and a database of drug-drug interaction side effects (Twosides). To demonstrate the biological use of these new resources, we used them to identify drug targets, predict drug indications, and discover drug class interactions

1. Donze, Jacques, et al. Potentially avoidable 30-day hospital readmissions in medical patients: derivation and validation of a prediction model. JAMA internal medicine 173.8 (2013): 632-638. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23529115

   >This simple prediction model identifies before discharge the risk of potentially avoidable 30-dayreadmission in medical patients. This score has potential to easily identify patients who may need more intensive transitional care interventions. Among 10 731 eligible discharges, 2398 discharges (22.3%) were followed by a 30-day readmission, of which 879 (8.5% of all discharges) were identified as potentially avoidable. The prediction score identified 7 independent factors, referred to as the HOSPITAL score: hemoglobin at discharge, discharge from an oncology service, sodium level at discharge, procedure during the index admission, index type of admission, number of admissions during the last 12 months, and length of stay. In the validation set, 26.7% of the patients were classified as high risk, with an estimated potentially avoidable readmission risk of 18.0% (observed, 18.2%). The HOSPITAL score had fair discriminatory power (C statistic, 0.71) and had good calibration.

1. Amarasingham, Ruben, et al. An automated model to identify heart failure patients at risk for 30-day readmission or death using electronic medical record data. Medical care (2010): 981-988. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20940649

   >An automated predictive model for 30-day readmission and death was derived and validated from clinical and nonclinical risk factors present on admission in 1372 HF hospitalizations to a major urban hospital between January 2007 and August 2008. Data were extracted from an electronic medical record. The performance of the electronic model was compared with mortality and readmission models developed by the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS models) and a HF mortality model derived from the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure Registry (ADHERE model). The 30-day mortality and readmission rates were 3.1% and 24.1% respectively. The electronic model demonstrated good discrimination for 30 day mortality (C statistic 0.86) and readmission (C statistic 0.72) and performed as well, or better than, the ADHERE model and CMS models for both outcomes (C statistic ranges: 0.72-0.73 and 0.56-0.66 for mortality and readmissions respectively; P < 0.05 in all comparisons). Markers of social instability and lower socioeconomic status improved readmission predictionin the electronic model (C statistic 0.72 vs. 0.61, P < 0.05).
